On the latest Masters in Business
podcast, an amazing conversation. I sit
down with Yuri Timmer. He's the director
of global macro at Fidelity. They run
about $16 trillion in client assets. Uh
they touch about 50 million separate
clients. What an amazing conversation.
Yurion has been uh started out in fixed
income before he became a market
technician. Now global macro is his beat
which means he covers everything US
overseas uh equity bonds commodities
economic data. I thought this
conversation was fascinating and I think
you will also uh what a depth and breath
of knowledge. With no further ado my
conversation with Fidelity's Yuri
Timmer.
[Music]
Welcome to Bloomberg.
>> Thank you very much, Barry.
>> I've been looking forward to this. I've
been consuming your stuff for it feels
like forever. I'm a big fan of what you
do. But before we get to your work at
Fidelity for the past three decades.
Let's talk a little bit about your
background. You get a bachelor's in
finance from Babson College. What was
the original career plan?
>> Well, so I was born and raised on the
island of Aruba in 1962.
um when Aruba was still very small and
sheltered and uh as a Dutch citizen uh
now also an American citizen but you
know generally uh the kid the Dutch kids
would go to Holland to go to higher
education but I was in love with the
American culture. I met many tourists on
the beach, you know. Um, and so I wanted
to go to the states and do the American
thing. And then, um, my father who was
an importer of construction materials,
etc., he had contacts in Boston. They
said, "Okay, well, you should send your
your kid to Babson because it's small.
He won't be overwhelmed as a as an
international student." And I've always
wanted to be an architect, but then in
the last year before uh finishing high
school, I'm like, I don't think I'm good
enough to be an architect. So, let me do
business. Uh and I figured, you know,
there's always something you can do with
a business degree. And so, I studied
finance with a minor in investments.
And then, you know, I graduated with no
work permit, right? So, I I was in that
place where you need to have obviously a
work permit. So back then, I don't know
if it's still the case, but back then
you got one year practical training visa
and then you had to go, you know, get a
get a real a real visa. And so I took
literally the only job that was offered
to me in the United States. So I applied
to every Dutch company. I figured at
least they'll have maybe some
sentimental reasons to hire a Dutch
person. I could have worked in Holland,
of course, but I wanted to be in the
States. So the Dutch bank ABN, which
later became ABN AMRO, right,
>> um hired me. I went to New York uh into
their corporate banking credit program
in which I had zero interest. Um but
it's like, you know, this is the job. No
pun intended, right? Uh
>> but you eventually become pretty senior
in the fixed income group at ABN.
>> Yeah. So I I was very lucky and again,
you know, it's sort of you take the job
that's offered to you and you make the
best of it. you know, you play the hand
that's dealt and literally within a few
months, um, ABN set up a capital markets
group because, you know, we were the the
primary dealer in New York, uh, together
with Lel National Bank in Chicago for
the HQ in Amsterdam, which of course was
one of the world's largest banks at the
time and a very large Treasury book.
>> And so I was the person who would
execute the the trades for HQ. So I
became a client of like Solomon Brothers
and Smith Barney and and you know the
you know um uh Goldman Sachs etc. And so
I got into the Wall Street game and I
learned everything about fixed income.
And to this day I'm you know like if if
you're either a stock market person or a
global macro person uh having a
foundation in fixed income is so
important.
>> It's so true you say that. Some of my
favorite stock analysts began as bond
analysts because they're concerned about
return of capital, not return on
capital. And it focuses them very much
on staying away from the speculative
nonsense and really I it it's been very
consistent over the years. I have a list
of of some favorite people in that
space. So So you start out in fixed
income. When did technical analysis and
becoming a a CMT uh arise in your
journey? So, so I was at ABNRU in New
York for 10 years and so I'm, you know,
I'm there executing trades, learning
about the markets, watching my the
tellerate and the Bloombergs were still
there were quad screens with the amber,
right?
>> Um, and you know, I just uh I've always
been a visual person and so I started
gravitating towards charts and you know,
charts are kind of the mainstay of what
I do even now 40 years later.
>> 40 years later, that's crazy.
>> Um, and I I like to write. I think I get
that from my dad who's a great writer.
And so I always had this kind of urge to
put pen to paper and and to show charts.
And so I I just started writing a
newsletter for the the people in my
universe at the time. Um and you know,
it would be like charts from CQG uh cut
out taped onto
a a type report and then faxed to
people. Like that's what the technology
was back then. Um and so it was all so
that's how it started and then I ended
up you know uh getting the the chartered
market technician although that may have
been during the Fidelity years.
>> So so how did you go from ABN AMRO to
Fidelity? When was that?
>> So ABN so the culture at ABMRO um uh not
not to spill any beans but this was a
long time ago 30 years ago.
>> 30 years ago I didn't like where it was
going. So we we ABN had a um a bank in
Chicago and they saw what a profit
center in New York was so they wanted to
they wanted me to work for them become a
commission salesman and I'm like it's
like it's not what I do. Uh and just
coincidentally at that time um Fidelity
came looking around uh looking for the
most obscure job in the world a a fixed
income technical analyst
>> right
>> I mean talk about a narrow field right
>> very specific
>> uh so that was in 1994
um around that time you know I was kind
of looking around and um and I had two
major career highlights within six
months of each other because in '94 I
was approached by Paul Tudtor Jones's
Oh, really?
>> And so I had a meeting with Paul in his
office downtown New York with this giant
teller rate on the screen and we were
looking at the bond chart 94 the bare
market
>> and he very famously had called the 87
crash before
>> and he was like is that do you think
that's a fourth wave and we were having
that conversation that was great. Um and
then you know I was approached by
Fidelity and I ended up going with
Fidelity but the last interview of that
process was with Ned Johnson.
>> Oh really? And so I was spent the
founder
>> I spent an hour with him in his office
talking about Parkers because I was
hired to go into the chart room and at
Fidelity nobody got into the chart room
without Ned's blessing. Right. Because
>> and back then were they still doing
charts by hand?
>> Yep.
>> Amazing.
>> Um and so uh so that so that anyway so
that's how the Fidelity career started.
And it was it was interesting because
this is now early 95 and of course 94
was that bare market. We had the the
so-called tequila crisis in Mexico. And
so the the new mandate from upstairs in
95 was we're not making any duration
bets. You just stick to your bottom up,
you know, you you look at credits and
like I'm coming in there as a technician
and like what am I supposed to do now?
Like there really is nothing for me to
do. Um, and so at that point I kind of
reinvented myself and became multi
multi-asset and I went to the equity
side and anyway so that was the
>> when you say multi-asset I I think
you're the only person in all of finance
with the title director of global macro
global means around the world macro
means 30,000 foot view
>> is everything out there in your
jurisdiction
>> uh pretty much so I don't do security
selection I you know we have armies the
very talented artist.
>> But you do stocks, bonds, alts, crypto,
commodities, gold, you name it.
>> Everything, but it's top down
>> as well as economic data. Yes. Interest
rates, employment, etc. And and that's
how I transitioned from being uh a
technical strategist to being more kind
of multiddisciplinary
because I quickly learned at Fidelity as
I was roaming the halls pitching ideas
to uh to portfolio managers who
generally are fundamentally oriented
right uh I'm like you know I'm it's like
I'm speaking a different language right
so Fideli's always had a lot of
technical analysts and the chart room
but I I had to like reinvent myself
again and pivot it towards at least
speaking their language. And like, you
know, a chart is a chart, right? It can
just be a bar chart of of the S&P or it
could be of the PE ratio or earnings or
monetary policy. So, I figured a chart's
a chart. I'm going to like weave a
broader approach to this and and that's
where kind of I came up with the title.
So when whenever I see a a technician
and a fundamental analyst having a
discussion, somewhere along the line,
someone says, "Look, I'm a a technical
analyst. I'm just telling you what's
going on in the battle between supply
and demand." It's up to you to create a
narrative around that. You tell us
what's going on fundamentally. I don't
know. But I could tell you who's
winning, the buyers or the sellers.
>> Yeah. So the fundamentals tell you um
kind of the why.
um maybe the what and the why and the
technicals tell you kind of the when and
the how much. It it helps give you
conviction. And generally speaking, we
use technical analysis like our equity
PMs do. Um like they're obviously going
to have an idea about a company and what
their long-term prospects are, but then
our technical analysts will will say,
"Okay, well, you've rated this stock a
one, meaning strong buy, but the chart
looks like hell." like you you should be
aware that the what's in what's
happening is not the same as what should
be happening. Uh and maybe it takes time
but it's like it's a it's a second
opinion which can be very helpful and
the other way around as well like a
chart looks amazing but it gets a really
poor fundamental ranking and we also
have a quantitative team that does a
quant overlay as well.
>> So so we talked about global macro. I'm
curious. You're a Dutch citizen
originally, born and raised in Aruba,
now a citizen of the US for the past 25
years. How does that international
upbringing affect how you see the entire
world of assets?
>> Uh, yeah, it's a great question. I I do
think
um that I'm I've been privileged to grow
up in a very diverse um environment.
Like if you look at old high school
pictures, I'm like maybe one of two
white kids in there. Everyone else is
different shades of, you know, brown.
You have all kinds of uh ethnic sort of
diversity.
>> What is a name for people from Aruba?
>> Well, they're Arubans.
>> Arubans. Is that all it is?
>> Yeah. Um but so very very diverse and um
and and so I think and and also just
going to different countries and
learning different cultures or being
exposed to them. I think it's helped me
like I view myself sort of as a global
citizen.
>> Well, you're a globe trotder. You're
you're you're in the US, you were in
California, you're in New York, Boston,
you're going to where? What's your next
few stops? London.
>> I'm flying to London on Saturday. I'll
be in Geneva after that. And then um
>> we were just in Lake Geneva a year ago.
Spectacular.
>> And then actually we're going to Holland
because my parents are they live in the
>> HG.
>> They're celebrating their 70th wedding
anniversary.
>> Wow. That's They're 91 and 97. So we got
three generations of timmer descending
on the HG in about in about a week and a
half. So
>> you know talking about global tri I'm in
Amsterdam for a week two years ago. I
feel like um oh look how sophisticated I
am. I was just a tourist for seven days
but one of my favorite cities.
>> Yeah. And I like I think what I I feel
at home in almost any place really in
the world. And uh you know when when
it's hard to understand what someone
says because the English is not their
first language, you you can kind of like
you you figure it out because you just
kind of used to this uh you know this
environment where everyone's coming from
different places and and like you know
even now like I I run and this is
totally separate topic but I run a food
camp at Burning Man and it's a very
global camp. We have 90 people. Uh we
all cook meals that we gift away to the
artists there, but we have like 30
Brazilians and we have like French and
Swiss and Mexican people and obviously
uh Americans. Um and and that like it's
it's easy to do because you're just used
to having all these different cultures
in in the same space.
>> So I'm kind of fascinated by the new I
don't love the earbuds. They're not
comfortable in my ear. But the new AI
enabled
>> instant translation that is Star Trek
next level futuristic. I I can see that
saying, "Oh, you want to go to Japan or
Korea or China? Here you go. Knock
yourself out."
>> That that sort of technological
innovation is that that turns that into
a must-have technology.
>> Yeah, for sure.
>> How how many languages do you speak?
>> Uh I speak obviously Dutch is my native
language. Uh English. which I used to be
totally fluent in Spanish, but I've I've
kind of lost that. And then of course
there is the world language called
Papento, which is what they speak in
Aruba.
>> Uh which is essentially kind of a
Spanish Portuguese blend. Uh but if you
don't know a word, you can just say it
in Dutch or English and it makes and
it's completely acceptable.
>> Really fascinating. Um so we were
talking about um what a globe trotder
you are. Let let's trot it around the
world and talk about uh various asset
classes. Um since you began your career
with bonds, let's let's start with
bonds. How do you see what's been going
on with Treasury yields anticipating
not only the 25 basis cut point we had
in September, but perhaps a couple more
this year and next?
>> Yeah. So, so Treasury yields uh such an
interesting market right now. We've been
stuck sort of between four and 5%.
>> For a while.
>> For a while. And when we go above four
and a half, it's like nothing good
happens. Like the the old Fed model from
the Greenspan days comes lurking back
and it starts to wobble the stock market
because the bond yield and the equity
yield are about the same right now. And
and so that that takes you back to the
the 80s and uh and you know mid 90s and
even the 70s and 60s where bonds to
stocks were positively correlated
instead of negatively correlated. That
happened that that began you know during
the great moderation era late 90s until
COVID basically. And so then in 2022 of
course the correlation flipped back to
positive. It was rising yields that
caused the problem in the stock market.
Um and and so there's a whole broader uh
conversation about the 6040, but just
dealing with treasuries right now. So as
you get close to five, it really starts
to freak the stock market out, but also
the bond buyers start to emerge because
there's value, right? I mean real rates
yield over 2 and a half% inflation
income is back into fixed income, right?
Uh but down at four when you have a
growth scare kind of like I mean I
wouldn't say it's a growth scare but the
>> there's some nervousness and some I hate
the word uncertainty but there's a lack
of clarity as to how all these things
tariffs yield FOMC plays out.
>> Yeah. So so at four generally uh I would
be a better seller than than a buyer.
But this question of you know fiscal
dominance you know clearly the
administration wants to grow out of the
debt. I think that's the very um overt
plan if you listen to Scott Bessend or
even
>> they're pretty explicit about it.
>> Um and so they're trying to goose the
economy and outrun the debt because
everyone knows you can't really cut the
debt very much because too much of the
budget is undis is not discretionary. Um
and so that's the plan and I think it's
basically it's a good plan because what
are the alternatives, right? Um
>> raising taxes and cutting spending which
we know what the odds of that happen.
>> Yes. Uh but running kind of that fiscal
train means deficit spending or at least
that's part of it and that means more
supply and that could mean higher term
premia for for long treasuries and we
saw we've seen that right the term
premium during the QA QE financial
repression days was like minus 150 which
makes no sense right term a risk premium
should always be positive and now it's
plus 60 plus 70 but historically it's
been plus 150 or even more and So if if
the term premium mean reverts back to a
normal level, positive level because
deficit spending and debt levels are
rising, you could easily see a five
handle on treasuries.
>> And a five handle on treasuries are not
going to sit well with equities. Like
the the the equity market can go up,
earnings can drive the bus, but the PE
gets under pressure because the
risk-free asset is now competing with
the risky asset and they're offering the
same yield. So, so quick question on
that. Uh, in the 2010s or at least
towards the end of the 2010s, we had an
inverted yield curve for a while. What's
the impact of that on that term premium
or lack thereof?
>> Yeah. So, we had that uh very inverted
yield curve. Obviously, it it shouted
recession and it didn't happen. And I
think the reason in hindsight was that
the economy is just less interest rate
sensitive than it used to be, right? So,
everyone refied their mortgage in 2020
and 21 at at sub 3%. That's also why the
housing market is frozen, right? But
also, if you look at the big banks,
right, why why is a yield curve
inversion typically bad is because banks
net interest margins goes upside down,
right? They borrow short, lend long, and
so banks stop lending and you get a
credit crunch and you get a recession.
But in this case uh the large banks you
know if you notice your your deposit
rate at the large uh mega center banks
uh has not really gone up commensurate
with the yield on money market funds
right so that deposit rate went up to a
half a percent and is now coming back
down again. So for a large bank, the
yield curve not only was never inverted,
it was extremely steep. Half a percent
funding, right? If you're if you're
funding your loans on deposits and
you're paying half a percent on those
deposits and you can lend at seven or
8%, you'll do that all day long.
>> And yet at the same time, we've watched
money markets go 5 trillion, 6 trillion,
7 trillion. It's become so easy with
your app to move money from, hey, I'm
going from Chase to Schwab. I'm going
from city to Fidelity where I'm getting
real yield. I wonder how much technology
plays a role in people. It used to be a
pain in the neck. Oh, I'm getting
quarter% in my checking account, but do
I really want to write a check and mail
it out and wait for the
>> Yeah. So, so you leave money at the bank
for convenience. You know, you got bills
to pay. Uh but if you have extra cash uh
you're buying a CD or or money market
fund or buying Ted bills or what have
you and it's a lot easier than it used
to be. And so now you got 7 trillion in
money market funds which a lot of people
actually think is money waiting to be
invested in the stock market. But I I I
don't think there's really a signal
there because I think that money came
out of the banks and probably will go
back to the banks at some point.
>> So some people have said, "Hey, as soon
as the Fed starts cutting rates, it'll a
make the cost of borrowing cheaper for
corporate America as well as cons
American households and B is going to
scare some of that money away and it's
got nowhere to go but equity." Fair
narrative or kind of a lot of wishful
thinking? Um, it it could be a
combination of both. But if you
typically look at when money market fund
assets swell like it did during the
pandemic, it's money coming out of the
stock market seeking a safe haven and
then when the stock market recovers, the
money goes back in the stock market.
That's not the pattern this year. The
money came out of the banks in part
because of like the Silicon Valley
debacle a few years ago,
>> but also 500 basis points of rate hikes
in 2022. So money markets went from 0 to
5 and a half and
>> suddenly attracted
>> and deposits went from zero to half you
know so money markets yielded 10x the
bank deposit and so some of that may go
to the stock market but I think but it
didn't come from the stock market let me
put it that way
>> so you noted something really
interesting I remember you wrote in 2022
bonds went from being a port in the
storm to the storm itself.
>> Yes. Uh so normally we think of money
leaving equity and going in the safe
harbor of money markets. Were we seeing
money exiting bonds and going to money
markets? Is that what happened? Was it a
duration play?
>> Um from among sort of the typical
investors we we have not really seen an
exodus at all. Uh and I think part of
that is just the demographics uh of you
know the baby boom solving for income
more so than growth. So when you look at
fund flows into fixed income, they
they've remained strong uh and they were
strong at, you know, 1% and they're
strong at 4%. So I think that is more of
a structural trend than playing the
markets, if you will. Like I think the
average investor is not looking at,
okay, well real rates are now positive,
so let me do this. But they're solving
for outcomes. They're buying
solutions-based funds like like our
target date will will have certain
amount of fixed income
>> which have just attracted so much money
in 401ks over the past 20 years. It's
it's amazing. So let's talk a little bit
about equities. Um I keep hearing people
complain about valuations, but if you
stayed out of equities due to elevated
valuation, you missed most of this run
from the 2013 breakout.
>> Yes. So um so the market obviously is
very bifurcated. We got the mag 7 the
cap weighted PE is you know 23 24 the
equal weighted PE is 18 so there's a
very large gap there
>> um
>> you know if you look back at the mid to
late 90s which is a kind of an analogous
period to today right we had the the 94
stealth bare market when Greenspan
raised rates 300 basis points then he
gave back 75 and we had a huge rally and
it was also the start of the internet uh
boom, you know, the Netscape IPO, I
think it was like a 96.
>> Uh so the post2022 period very analogous
to post 1994, you know, soft landing,
ease off the the brakes, markets markets
rip and then uh the post98 long-term
capital. Yeah,
>> that you know, 22% decline, very robust
recovery, and then Greenspan eases three
times into that recovery. We're seeing
the same thing now. We had a 21% tariff
tantrum, right? Uh no recession, you
know, the kind of administration backed
off. Very, very strong, one of the
strongest ever recoveries from a 20%
decline other than 1998. Um and then now
Powell's easing into that. And so, but
the point is that that period saw almost
non-stop multiple expansion. Um and
that's what we've seen since 2022. And
you know pees are they have they are
strong predictors of long-term return.
So if you take a 10-year cape ratio um
and you regress that against 10-year
forward returns you see a very high um
you know it explains the forward returns
very well. Um but over the near term a
high PE has very little to say about the
next year or two. And this is because
the market tends to be in a rising
trend. Momentum begets momentum. Um and
that's what what we're in. So it's it's
a you know it it's a tough game to time
on the mean reversion of pees even
though we know that historically it's
between 10 and 30 and it does mean
revert but when the mean reverts
reversion starts and from what level is
very very difficult to do especially
during secular trends which I think
we're very clearly in.
>> So so many different places to to go
with this. I have a dozen questions.
Maybe we'll go a little long the segment
and and delve deeper into equities. I
love the concept of a secular bull
market as opposed to a cyclical. Um but
I think a lot of people don't really
understand the difference. Give us your
definition of what is a secular bull
market, when this one began and why.
>> Yeah. So we have so we have the market
cycle which is generally driven by the
business cycle. So you have a recession,
then you have the early cycle recovery
where things get less bad. And of
course, the market is always
anticipating that, right? The market's
always in price discovery. And this is
why at bottoms price will lead earnings,
which is why the PE always goes up in
the first year of a bull market like it
always does. And and it doesn't make
sense on the surface. People are like,
"Oh, this can't be real. It's all PE
driven. Where are the earnings?" Well,
the market's just front running the
earnings, you know. Uh but then there
are this the secular trends.
And you know if you go back a hundred
years you can see them uh you can spot
them very easily because the market has
a kind of central trend line plus 10%
nominal plus 7 6 and 3/4 real and if you
run a regression trend line against the
the total real return of the S&P or some
basket of stocks going back 150 years
it's like perfect and then you have the
pendulum swinging above it and below it.
So you have
>> very noisy but still the overall trend
is being maintained.
>> But you have these super cycles where
you're outperforming the trend line.
>> So the 80s and 90s was one of those. So
instead of a 10% return we got 18%
returns for like 18 years.
>> Uh the 50s and 60s after World War II.
The 20s that was a truncated one but
from 20 to 29 boy did that thing go.
>> Um and since ' 09 is where I put it.
Other technicians generally disagree
with me. they think it was 2013.
>> Um, when you look at the cape model, you
look at deviation from trend, you look
at the slope of those early trend lines,
for me it's 09, which puts it at 16. And
and of course, and then you have the
secular bare markets, right? So the
2000s was one, uh, the 1970s, very
famous, of course, 1930s, doesn't mean a
market necessarily goes down, but it's
it's underperforming that 10% trend
line. And generally, in real terms, it's
probably going down. And so that's kind
of how I define the secular trend.
>> So I we are in agreement on so much
stuff. I I'm gonna circle back to '09
and push back a little bit,
>> but um you mentioned that first year you
get a PE spike as the market anticipates
improving earnings. One of the things
that's kind of fascinating is to see how
much of a bull market's gains are
attributable to not improving
fundamentals but multiple expansion from
82 to 2000. What was it? Threearters of
the gains were multiple expansion. How
much of that is psychology and how much
of that is just people getting on board
late in in as the market rallies? Uh it
it's it's both but yeah for instance in
82 the PE was like seven
>> and in 2000
>> and what was the yield in 82
>> it is double digits almost 20%. Uh lot
of competition
>> and then in 2000 yes exactly and in 2000
the PE was 35 uh using operating
earnings that that was the forward PE
actually um the trailing PE was like 45.
So that's a hell of a pendulum swing.
And you know obviously um 1982 inflation
was very high. They had the malaise of
in the economy. Bonds were very
competitive. Nobody wanted to pay for
earnings.
>> The death of equities which is a few
years earlier on business week.
>> Death of equities. Yes. For sure. Um,
and then people become more comfortable
and then they go from comfortable to
confident and then it's like, "Yeah, I'm
going to pay I'm going to pay 20 or 25
uh times these earnings." And then of
course then you have the growth the the
growth stocks. So the late 90s obviously
were where you know I I used to call
them the Janice 20.
>> There was a fund that would just the
Moto stocks and so
>> I remember the Ryan Net net funds around
that time.
>> Exactly. And of course, right now it's
the Mag 7, formerly known as the as the
fangs. Um, and those are secular
growers, right? And there's a theme,
right? It was internet back then, it's
AI now. And people get onto the onto the
bandwagon and it's like, yeah, you know,
I'll pay 35 times earnings for a company
that is in this space and is going to
grow their earnings uh in a secular way,
not a cyclical way. Mhm.
>> And and so it's totally plausible and
understandable, but at the end it goes
too far and I don't think we're we're
anywhere close to that. Uh but then you
start looking for signs of frost. But
yeah, but that's that's the pendulum
swing.
>> So So let's talk about 09 and why so
many of your technical brethrens dated
to 2013, which was when all of the major
indices broke out over their prior
trading range. So the push back I hear
to '09 is well that's like dating the 82
to 2000 bull market to the lows in 7374
and you're still all you're doing over
that period is recovering the selloff
23rd what we were down 56 57% from
October07 to March09 and then to get
back to where you were in ' 07 it took
till 2013. So, so why 09 as opposed to
13?
>> It it's totally legit argument. Uh, but
I would say a couple things. One is this
is not an exact science, right? There's
only been two or three or four secular
bull markets, right?
>> Small data set.
>> Small data set. It's it's not a quant.
You have to look at the chart at the
slope. So, I date this the secular bull
market um from the 50s. I date at 49.
Even though 49 was not the low, right?
The the low was
>> 46 4 something like that.
>> Um but in 49 something changed and and
the slope started to you know like the
market found itself and and and that
trajectory started to really compound at
double digits and you broke out of that
big shelf that was really from 29 all
the way to 49. 70s the low was of course
in 74 October 74 after 48% bare market
we had some other little cycles but then
in 82 it took off there was a change in
the fundamentals you know uh vulkar
broke inflation um and so and then you
look at the ca so then I get
verification from the fundamentals so
then so I look at the charts and yes I I
see the the argument and I agree it's a
good point um but in '09 9 the market
just went straight up after a decade of
sideways. In 82 the market went straight
up after a decade of sideways. In 49
same thing whether the low was in or not
and of course in real terms the 82 low
was below the 74 low. So
>> because of inflation you really fell
tremendously in the
>> so I want to get second opinions from
the real chart and from the
fundamentals. So the cape model again
where you compare the 10-year PE to the
10-year forward return looks very
similar at the 09 and not similar at the
13 when the market already had a lot of
momentum. And then the other thing I
look at again that 150year regression
trend line of the real S&P
>> 150 years.
>> Yeah. And so at the at secular peaks uh
the market is about 100% above the trend
line
>> and at secular troughs it's about 50%
below.
>> So that point was in09. It was not in
13. So so I look at at at at like the
weight of the evidence from a multitude
of indicators and again it's it's not an
exact science. I I'm not saying I'm
right, they're wrong, but that's for me
that's where I get
>> But you've been a whole lot more right
than wrong than many other people.
>> And and it's interesting. Um so in '09,
you know, I was actually running a a
fund back then, a kind of a global macro
fund and I was like the market was so
depressed, right? So remember March
of09. Sure. Of course.
>> Uh and I'm like, you know, I want to be
long uh but what if I'm wrong? And I'm
like, at this point, if I'm wrong,
>> so what? You're already down 50. Cut in
half.
>> Well, but at that at that point, the
whole system is going to collapse. So,
it's like, why why not why not bet at at
that point? Um, and so, yeah.
>> When is down more than 50% in US
markets? Not a great entry point. I
mean, that that's one thing. But I have
to ask you a question about 09 because I
was looking through some of my old notes
as I was preparing for this and I have
I'm curious as to your thoughts on some
of the behavioral aspects including
sentiment and bull bear ratios. I wrote
something up in October09 calling that
recovery the most hated bull market in
market history. Markets went straight
up. Everybody was miserable. It's a head
fake. It's a false breakout. This is all
going to be a disaster. And if you
listen to those people, you left a ton
of money on the table. What's your
thought on that extreme sentiment in one
direction or the other and just what it
means when everybody hates a particular
asset class?
>> It's obviously an opportunity because
that means that everyone is not on the
same side of of of the boat, right? And
and actually and what I
>> or they're all on the wrong side of the
boat. Uh but uh uh before I answer the
rest of that, I want I what I was going
to say earlier was when you run the
regression of the '09 to present S&P
either in real or nominal terms and you
run the same regression from 82 to 2000,
from 49 to 68,
>> it's exactly the same slope. And and and
so if in ' 09 I got bullish and in 13
I'm like, yeah, now we've taken out the
high. So now we can say this bull market
is confirmed. So the 13 for me is not
the start but it's confirmation.
>> But if I had looked at nothing else
>> for the la for the next you know 12
years
>> today I would be within 10% of that
slope having materialized. And so again
you're never going to do that on on a
secular chart. Do you want to have
weight of the evidence? But it shows you
how powerful that context can be to just
look at those different time frames and
see where they are because it it'll keep
you on the right side of the market.
>> So last question on equities given the
49 to 66 rally, the 82 to 2000 and then
the '09 forward.
How much legs does this secular bull
market have? Can can this go another
five, six, seven years? And the other
related question is how much of a reset
does that giant fiscal stimulus of 2021
22 build into into markets?
>> It's it's a great question. And so on
the surface of it, we're 16 years in.
The last two were 18 years. Um but
again, sample size of two, like you
can't go with that, right? But the cape
model uh again which has been a very
good long-term model um in terms of the
10-year keer for the market suggests
that the so the the PE the the growth
rate in the PE peaked in 19 for obvious
reasons because it's a 10-year model. So
09 rolls off and then you know you have
that peak and we've been holding steady
at around you know 14 15% 10ear kagers.
um that actually has another peak in
about like 2026 78. Uh my guess is that
that acceleration will be an AI bubble
>> or it could be where it's just like you
know the AI boom the mag 7 like all of a
sudden everyone's buying companies with
no earnings because they're promising to
be the next killer app and that sort of
thing.
>> Next Pets.com.
>> Yes. Um and my guess is that if we are
heading into a fiscally dominant era or
we're in it already. So, we had 5
trillion of helicopter money in 2020. We
now have another $5 trillion fiscal
bill. Uh, if the next Fed post is going
to be just more dovish
>> than the economics suggest in order to
fund that, help fund that debt, then you
could see inflation, you know, be
structurally higher than 2%, maybe three
to four. And if that and if the 10-year
yield at that point goes to a five
handle because the term premium is back,
you can easily see a scenario where in a
few years can that Fed model principle
of rising yields bringing down the PE uh
is going to be the thing that flattens
that secular slope. That doesn't mean
like a 2000s like bare market. It
doesn't have to mean that, but it could
just be a flattening. instead of running
at 2x the 10-year rate of change, maybe
you're at halfx or something like that.
>> So, generally speaking, when you see an
elevated cape, it's not a sell signal.
It's really a signal lower your future
return expectations, things going to be
a little more little less easy sledding.
>> Yes, I think the next 10 years will be
less less robust than the last, but it
doesn't mean they have to be negative at
at all.
>> You you mentioned the 80s into the 90s
and the postw World War II era. It's
kind of fascinated to look at rolling
15-year periods. The the 15 years
following 09 is the third best 15-year
period in history. It's really amazing.
>> Y yeah.
>> Yep. So, so let's talk a little bit
about the current environment. You you
look at more than just stocks and bonds.
You look at a lot of economic data as
well and and chart that. So, how do you
think where we are in the current
economic cycle? How do you describe our
location in the business cycle?
>> So, generally speaking, the economy
remains pretty solid. People are
employed. Their wages are uh exceeding
the inflation rate at this point. Um
debt levels are not high at least as a
percent of GDP, right? So, the household
debt to GDP ratio peaked during the
financial crisis in pretty modest,
hasn't it?
>> It's Yeah, it was 100% of GDP. It's now
70. M
>> so there's a debt issue on the
government's balance sheet but but not
in the household or even the corporate
balance sheet
>> even the government side isn't our debt
to GDP ratio like half of Japan
something like that
>> uh so about 120% if it's just a federal
debt if you add all other debt it's
about 250 uh but it's comparable to
other regions but certainly Japan gets
the prize and China as well just in
terms of the growth rate of the debt
>> China oh Okay. Not total, but yeah,
China's been growing debt and the
Chinese provinces have been growing debt
as well.
>> Yeah. And and the Chinese numbers of
course are um can be a little vague
because the the federal debt in China is
not high, but they have the four big
policy banks that are essentially
providing liquidity and so you have to
add that and uh so China and Japan are
are the worst offenders. The US is is on
par with most kind of European and other
other countries. Um uh but so anyway so
so the the economy looks pretty good but
you know one of the things that co did
was it sort of upended a lot of the
things we think about when we look at
the at the economic cycle at the
business cycle. So, you know, of course,
we know what happened. The economy
froze. Uh people got laid off and then
at least in the US, the economy came
back really fast, faster than in other
places. And the labor wasn't there,
right? Baby boomers had checked out.
They left the labor force. Of course,
the borders were closed. And I remember
like I was uh I was doing a lot of
flying back to LA at the time because I
was hiding in Santa Barbara because the
office was closed. And it's like like
the counter at JetBlue in Boston was
like they just did not have enough
people. People were coming back. Like
everyone was like, "Okay, we're back."
But the the they weren't there wasn't
the supply chains weren't there. And so
we had this very tight labor market that
of course we would hear about all the
time, you know, from the Joltz report,
two job openings for every job seeker,
that sort of thing. Um and that has been
worked off over the last few years. I
think that was the goal of the
tightening policy or part of the goal.
So when you look at the jolts report or
you look at the the U3 jobless rate
relative to NEU the non-acelerating rate
of employment um everything is in
balance like it's right at that zero
line. So the supply
>> which is is that why we've kind of been
hanging around 43 42 in unemployment.
>> So no one's hiring but not many people
are looking for jobs
>> and and not a lot of people getting laid
off.
>> No. And so there's balance, right? the
job seekers versus the the job
providers. But you look at that chart
over 50 years. Uh and you can see that
there's a pendulum swing of that
business cycle. So we went from very
tight
>> to neutral and you know like the
inclination is to look at that and it's
like well every other time that's
happened the next phase is contraction.
And I think that's what the bond market
is saying. That's I think what where the
Fed's coming from now that they did the
25. They're looking at the the jobs
data. They're looking at the revision,
right? The jobs report revision.
>> Big downward revision almost 911,000
jobs. And they're like, "Okay, you know,
we should we should build in some some
cushion for that." And so I think that's
generally the vibe, but other than that,
uh, you know, we have a whole economics
team that looks at the business cycle
and we're not really seeing a lot of red
flags other than that yellow flag, if
you will. How closely does the market
cycle track the business cycle? Because
you know, I've heard it said so many
times, the market is not the economy and
vice versa. And the old joke is the
stock market has forecast nine of the
last four recessions. Um how do you see
the that overlay?
>> There is of course a connection, right?
As you look at uh GDP growth and
inventories, I mean it's less about that
now than it was decades ago. uh the
impact of monetary policy but you know
the markets are not the economy. There
is a reflection because if the economy
grows earnings are going to grow and
then uh you know the market's going to
go up because price follows earnings but
there's a sentiment equation in the
stock market that of course you don't
have so much in the in the economic
cycle and um and you have the timing
right so the market is always going to
anticipate future changes. So
>> you you have a chart showing markets
bottom eight months below
>> profits. So you can
>> that's a huge lead time eight months.
>> So you can be 100% correct about the
economic cycle and be 100% wrong about
the market because if it's already been
reflected right
>> and if it's already have has even
overearned against that future signal
then you're buying yesterday's news. Uh
but yes so the market generally at
bottoms um will bottom two three
quarters before earnings that happened
during co and I remembered like it was
yesterday because during co you know the
market fell 35% February and March then
like late March it bottomed and I think
March 25th
>> and I think by June it was at new highs
and 69% for the year from the lows which
is amazing
>> and people like the economist had a
cover saying this is divorce from
reality and everyone on. And so it's my
job a to have people not sell in the
first place to be to be the long-term
investor. You know, the way I I always
describe it is you're getting a really
juicy 10 11% return uh by investing in
stocks, but the price of admission
>> is you got to endure some volatility and
if you can't stand the price, then you
don't get the reward. How do you explain
to clients and I I got a million calls
man this market has become disconnected
from reality what's your explanation to
them
>> so that so that what what happened it
happened after the financial crisis
>> so price bottoms the market bets on
recovery and it could be wrong right
price discovery doesn't mean the market
knows everything and that's one thing
where I sometimes disagree with
technicians who say market's always
right say well the market's not always
right but the market's always right in
discounting everything that's knowable
Right.
>> So, it's right in that, but it doesn't
mean that that what it's discounting
can't change. Right. And we saw this
during the the tariff tantrum in April.
>> The market was pricing in a left tail
that never arrived and now and then it
had to unpric it. Um so, but so the
market looks ahead and the market
bottomed in March of '09. Earnings
didn't bottom until the third or fourth
quarter. Same thing during COVID. March
bottomed in March of 2020. Earnings
recovered third or fourth quarter. and
uh and so you you have so you can't look
at the news and say how can the market
be here when the earnings or like people
are dying.
>> So how did you explain this to clients?
I'm curious.
>> I explained it exactly that way that the
price always leads and you can't look at
it in sort of a linear way. You have to
just um you you have to know that at at
inflection points the the the the price
action is going to make no sense. uh and
this is why people you know sell at
bottoms and and buy at tops because they
are they're trying to understand the
narrative and the narrative is not the
one that that is ruling the the roost at
the time.
>> One one of the things that we found was
useful was explaining to clients that
their life experience isn't market cap
weighted when you look at what's driving
the big indexes. It was back then it was
the Fang, now we call it the Magnificent
7. But we did a calculation and found
out that if all the airlines, all the
hotels, all the local retailers, like
just a run of the worst businesses
during the pandemic, if they just
disappeared tomorrow, it was 6% of the
S&P 500. And you know, or Apple or
Microsoft. It's like it's amazing how
how our daily experience is so different
from what markets are like.
>> And and we had that during Brexit in
2016. I mean, that was constantly the
headlines. What about Brexit? Why is the
the US market ignoring it? Well, because
>> irrelevant
>> because the UK is 3% of S&P revenues.
That's why, you know,
>> so so that raises a really interesting
question about uh the US versus the rest
of the world in terms of economic
activities. So the S&P 500 just gets
just about half of its uh revenue from
overseas. For most of the past 15 years,
the US side of consumer spending,
business spending, government spending
has been very supportive of the domestic
side of the S&P 500. Kind of feels like
that's shifting a little bit. We're
seeing a little slowdown on consumer
spending, a little slowdown on economic
activity here as Europe and Asia seem to
be starting to finding their footing
after a bad 10 years. Can we just pass
off the baton without the S&P stumbling?
Is that is that possible?
>> Um, it's possible and it's actually
happening right now. And and this is one
of the areas that I'm most excited about
right now is that uh this US bull market
has become a global bull market. You
look at EM stocks, Chinese stocks, um,
Europe, Japan. Um, and it's very
exciting because, you know, for many
years, right, the US exceptionalism
train has been running since 2014 15.
Um, and the rest of the world was always
so tempting with its lower valuation.
And I I've had conversations, you know,
with our asset allocation PMs for years
saying like, yeah, I can I can buy EHO
or EM at 14 times. Why? Like
>> it's cheap for a reason though.
>> It's cheap for a reason. The market's
very efficient. Um but for the but so
the catalyst so you need a catalyst to
make the mean reversion in valuation to
trigger that and the catalyst is always
going to be related to earnings. Uh like
if you look at the relative performance
US versus non- US over the past 10 years
it is exactly the same as a relative
earnings line like it's the same thing.
So you need something to change in the
on the earning side and that's changing.
So, we have of course a very
concentrated market in the US and and
that does pose risks, right? I mean, if
if those seven stocks go down, guess
what? The S&P is going to go down. Even
if 70% of the stocks in the S&P are
going up. If you're an indexer or you're
buying an ET, an S spy, you're not going
to feel those gains because those top
seven stocks are are taking the index
down. And so it was so for the last year
or so it was a question of okay how do
you diversify against concentration
risk? Do you go down cap? Do you buy the
Russell 2000? Uh but now the answer is
easier because now you have a catalyst a
fundamental catalyst that is causing the
mean reversion to happen with between US
and non US stocks. And where that's
coming from is that so I'm a big fan of
the discounted cash flow model, the DCF,
which looks at not so much earnings, but
the payout of earnings. So if you have
earnings growth at 10% and 70% of those
earnings are being returned to
shareholders as dividends or buybacks,
>> the payout is that 70% and the payout
ratio is 70%. And for the US, it's
always been a very dominating scenario
where the the payout in the US was very
strong because of all the share buybacks
we have here.
>> Where are we today with that? Are we
still seeing the same sort of share
buybacks? Cuz it seems like we haven't
been hearing a lot of announcements, but
that doesn't mean it's not happening. We
don't hear a lot, but uh the buybacks
are at record highs. There's 300 billion
over the last uh 12 months, and the
payout ratio is 75% for the S&P,
>> but guess what? The payout for EPHA,
which is non US developed stocks, uh the
payout ratio is also 75%. It always used
to be lower because they don't do
buybacks over there. They do dividends,
but now they're doing more buybacks. And
the growth rate in the payout itself
over the last 5 years is now higher in
Epha than in the US.
>> So you're getting equal or superior or
at least competitive fundamentals at um
at a fraction of the valuation. And that
that is a good that's a good deal. And
so that so finally that that part is
working where the pond that we're
fishing from is now broader. And for me
it kind of it's it's a barbell strategy.
I don't want to be short the MAG seven
because they can get bigger and you
don't want to miss out on that. But
rather than going down cap in the US,
>> go overseas,
>> do a barbell of MAG7 and non US stocks,
then you can play the dollar uh with
dollar weakening story. You can get
equally good fundamentals for a 15 PE
instead of a 24 PE. And to me, that's
that's that's a good that's a good thing
right now. So, so the last two things I
want to talk to you about in terms of
the current environment are inflation
and sentiment. And I'm not sure how much
of this is related. You know, when we
see the Michigan sentiment data, it
seems to be so awful. And it just
doesn't feel like is this really worse
than the financial crisis, worse than
COVID, worse than the dot implosion in
9/11, or worse than the 87 crash. If if
you follow the sentiment data, it's
saying yes. Just doesn't feel that way.
>> No, it doesn't. And I think the
sentiment data uh obviously they're very
bifurcated by political belief, right?
>> You know, and I
>> we've seen those charts really useful.
>> Yeah. And I I spent time on both coasts
and I you know I was in at a dinner
party in Monaceto, California a few
weeks ago and people were like how how
can everything look so good when we're
like at the end of the world type of
thing right
>> and then I'll be you know in some other
place and it'll be the the total
opposite. U but I think a lot of the
sentiment data are still driven by the
inflation data like obviously the
inflation rate has come down to 2.8% 8%
>> but everything remains more expensive
>> that that you know that co uh spike you
know that has not been unwound and one
of and that's one of the things I worry
about because not not to make a
comparison to the 1970s which obviously
was the great inflation
>> long term
>> but during the 50s and 60s inflation was
super low 2% then you to the second half
of the 60s it started to creep up and
then it came back down but in order to
for the average to be at 2% %. If you go
to 6%, you then need to go below two for
the average to be two. And we haven't
done that. We went from two to nine to
2.8,
>> right?
>> And we're we never went below two. And
and if we for some reason get another
upswing and we're at three and four,
like that five-year number is now going
to be at four 5%. And I think that's
what's driving a lot of this. It
certainly did during COVID. And it's
things like food, right? So, you know,
like the top
>> now beef prices are up. Egg egg prices
have come back down, but beef prices
have run away.
>> So, I I think a lot of it has to do with
that because, you know, people are
employed. Wages are are competitive
right now. Um, and you know,
unemployment rates 4.3%.
But I think it's just that that cost of
living. Uh, it just kind of like grinds,
you know, and it's been grinding for
five years now. So, so let's talk about
that 2% target. You know, in the 2010s,
an era of concerns about deflation and
monetary stimulus, 2% seemed like a
reasonable number. Is that still a
reasonable number now that and that was
an upside target? Yeah. Right. You were
at 1% aiming for two. Now we're at 2 and
a half, three, aiming back at two. Maybe
in an era of fiscal stimulus, two and a
half, 3% makes more sense. I mean, I'm
not a monetarius, but I I don't know why
the whole world changes except for our
inflation talking.
>> Yeah. There's nothing
magical about two. Like if you go back
150 years again, the average inflation
rate is like 3%. 2.8.
>> If you look at a distribution of equity
pees and the inflation rate,
>> the sweet spot is sort of one to four,
right? So whether you're at three or two
like for the stock market doesn't
doesn't matter like 10 10 to two like
that that natter that matters. Um uh and
and that distribution is interesting
because uh obviously the higher the
inflation rate goes the lower the PE
which makes perfect sense because if
inflation goes up bond yields go up then
the safe asset is is very competitive
with the risky asset. So why take the
risk?
>> Plus the cost of capital goes up. Um if
you go to the left tail deflation there
is really no correlation. Um nobody
likes deflation. Um so so from that
angle two and a half is not a problem.
Even three is not a problem. I think the
Fed worries that if they were to ever
admit that you know inflation
expectations could get unanchored but
they went to the AIT thing right the
average inflation targeting. Um and
actually that actually prevented them
from raising rates when they should have
back in 2021 and two
>> they were late to the party to raise and
they seem like they were late to the
party to cut as well.
>> So their their policy was we need to see
the whites in the eyes of inflation
before we raised rates. Uh and and by
the time the whites of the eyes were
visible it was like too late. You know
inflation was at five going to nine. Um
but so you know it it's a nuance thing
but again 3% is not going to be the end
of the world. It just means the bonds
have a term premium um and stock market
is still fine. Maybe the PE is like 17
instead of 19. But like you know if
earnings are doing the heavy lifting it
doesn't matter. But again it's like what
what will it take for the Fed to
actually say that? um or will they ever
say it or will we just have a postpowell
Fed that says you know instead of
neutral being inflation plus 100 neutral
is inflation and and and and you know so
they are at three instead of four or
something.
>> So so I see your charts everywhere. Not
only are they all over social media but
you do regular chart packs. I I love
your monthly chart pack. I'm going to
flip open my laptop and let's look at
some of your favorite charts. uh and
I'll make these available on YouTube and
and on the website when uh when this
posts. Um let's start with market cycles
and and what we see going back to around
our birth date um is just a series of
long bull markets followed by shorter
shallower bare markets. Tell us about
this market cycle chart and what are the
different shading means in in blue and
red? What what's the significance of
that?
>> Yeah. So, um so the shadings are is the
valuation the 5-year cape ratio.
>> When when it starts to get pricey, it
turns red.
>> It turns red. Yeah. And so what the top
part of the chart shows are the market
cycles. So the green are, you know, the
bull markets, of course, cyclical bull
markets. The red are the bare markets.
And you can see, as we as we talked
about earlier, they're really it's
pretty rare for a 50% draw down. There's
only been really a couple of them. Um,
and so what this shows is that the
current bull market, as strange as it or
as unusual as it has felt for many
people, actually is pretty garden
variety, right? 88% gain uh over 35
months. So, it's pretty pretty average.
But then when you look at the bottom
panel, it shows the relative the
percentage of stocks outperforming the
index. Mhm.
>> And now you see something pretty
unusual, something we've only seen a few
times in history. And that is of course
the the concentration effect of the MAG
7. Then before that, the Fangs and it is
the market is as concentrated as it was
in the late 90s and the early to mid70s
which was the original Nifty50 period.
And so you know for um for an indexer I
guess it it doesn't matter for an active
manage active investor it does but even
for an indexer it does because the
largest stocks are getting bid up
whether they deserve it or not. Of
course they're large because they
deserve to be generally but it shows you
how narrow the market has been during
this cycle. Um and so it it's it's just
a way of describing kind of where we
are. So you got the cyclical on the top
and the bottom speaks more to the
secular.
>> Huh.
>> Really interesting. Let's go to um debt
dynamics which is kind of interesting.
Let's see how far down I have to go for
this.
>> Did I pass it already?
>> No, no, it's next one.
>> There it is. All right.
>> All right. So, let's talk about debt
dynamics, which shows the change in
federal debt versus what? Uh so what
this chart shows and I it's a very
simple chart but it's I think it speaks
volumes is that you know during COVID we
kind of I think entered the fiscally
dominant era where debt financing or
deficit spending becomes a very major
tool um which is definitely different
from the financial crisis when we
actually had austerity after the
financial crisis with the tea party
movement now we have the opposite and in
the initial years after that fiscal
expansion started, the Fed was actually
doing a lot of the heavy lifting by uh
putting those bonds or not those bonds
but putting bonds on its balance sheet.
So you could see the rise in debt is is
largely accommodated by an expanding
balance sheet. Since that time, since
2022, the Fed's gone into quantitative
tightening mode where it's shrinking its
balance sheet, but the debt just keeps
going up. So the debt is now up about 14
trillion in the last 5 years. Um, and
only about two and a half of that is
sort of been absorbed by the Fed.
>> So, I put two and two together and it's
like, okay, if that
>> purple line at the top just keeps going
up,
>> who's going to buy this, right? Is who's
going to buy the debt? And will the Fed
be forced
uh back into playing a bigger role in
kind of mopping up that supply? And
that's the fiscal dominance theme.
That's a little bit of modern monetary
theory is that the Fed can just buy up
all the debt and there's no constraints
whatsoever. SOM stands for what?
>> System open market account.
>> So that's what the Fed has on its
balance sheet that went up since the
financial crisis and it's come down
since 2018.
>> It's the part of the Fed's balance sheet
that is sort of the QE part, if you
will.
>> All right. So let's talk a little bit
about equity supply and demand. What are
we looking at this chart back to 1986?
Is this simply liquidity driven or
what's going on here?
>> So I think this is uh and it it not a
lot of people talk about this but I
think this is one of the fundamental
drivers of the current secular bull
market era. And so you can see on the
chart I started the clock at the bottom
in '09 which again I I believe is the
start of the secular bull market. And I
look at just the supply and demand of
equities just from within the corporate
America structure. So not investor flows
but how much were there in IPOs and
secondary issues and it's a couple of
trillion.
>> Uh how much was share buybacks and how
much was M&A and share buybacks and M&A
have something in common in that it's
corporates buying shares of other
corporates and those shares get retired.
Right? So that that's the demand for
shares and what you see is like if you
look at the supply demand ratio like
it's very unbalanced like it's the
demand far exceeds the supply and to me
this has been one of the important
drivers for driving returns in the
secular bull market and there's no signs
that this is this is letting up and so
when when we think about what inning is
the secular bull market in when is it
going to end and why this is one of the
things I look at is just, you know, when
when you're retiring far more shares
than you're issuing, it's like, duh, you
know, markets are going to go up, all
else being equal.
>> What what's so surprising about this is
how relatively insignificant the retail
flows are. Yes, they are.
>> It's it's just the opposite of how so
many people describe it.
>> Um, let's talk about US fundamentals
versus EPHA fundamentals. So, this looks
at various market data, buybacks,
dividends, etc.
um tell us what this chart is showing
us.
>> Yeah, so this we were talking about
earlier about there finally being a
catalyst for non- US stocks to compete
with the U with the MAG7 driven US stock
market. And so on the left I show the
earnings line for the S&P the payout so
that the share of earnings being
returned quote unquote to uh
shareholders shareholder yield
>> as as dividends uh and buybacks. And
then at the bottom you see the the
payout ratio again either as dividends
in the yellow buybacks in the purple and
you can see the the payout has risen
very nicely almost a double since o
since 5 years ago payout ratio is about
75%. So very bullish fundamentals like
you you know those fundamentals deserve
a high a high PE, right? Because not
only is are the earnings growing, but
they're being returned uh to
shareholders, which of course is worth
more than if you're not getting them
back. It's just the present value of
future cash flows. But what's changed
just in the last few years is that for
EPHA again which is the Msei non- US
developed index you see an even better
growth rate in the payout and you see
more than double
>> yeah and you see an equally robust
payout ratio again of about 75%. So the
rest of the world is really competitive
now despite the fact that this is such a
mag sevenheavy market and so this is you
know just a very exciting time because
you can actually you don't have to make
that makeorb breakak binary decision
like you're either in these big stocks
>> or or you're left behind. There are
other places to get those returns down.
What what's so fascinating about this
chart is how inverted the ratio of
buybacks to dividends is. In the US, 45%
of shareholder yield is buybacks, 30%
are dividends. That flips in Europe,
it's 47% are dividends, only 27% are
buybacks or I should say EPHA, not just
Europe, although a lot of it seems to be
concentrated in Europe.
>> Um, how much of that is just driven by
tax policy and regulations? Um I think
it's largely culture. It's just, you
know, and Europe is more of a value uh
market, right? So it's really like the
banks are are really uh running the show
right now. And so the US it's more the
growthy stock. So they don't want to so
you know dividends are kind of like a
sacred contract if you will like it
takes a lot for dividends to be cut. Um,
so I think Europe and Japan has just
generally been more of a of a
valuedriven uh and the culture has been
more okay, we're going to earn so much
and you're going to get that back as
dividends. But especially the Japanese
and also the Europeans are are getting
much more with the shareholder culture
now in terms of unlocking value and and
returning those as as buybacks. So it's
they're they're getting they're they're
starting to play the game. La last few
questions before we get to our favorite
questions. Um you you have a section in
the chart book about the post 6040
uh world. I've heard people say the old
6040 is now 503020 or 50301055.
Tell us what you think of as the post
6040 world.
>> So I I look at it I I call it the 60
2020. Um so the 6040 paradigm worked
like a charm right from the late 90s
until the early 2020s. Um, and you know,
60% S&P, 40% Bloomberg A, so the
investment grade bond index,
>> and you got a 9% KGER against the 9% VA
>> and like what's not to like about that,
right? During that time, inflation was
like two and a half. So, you got a very
attractive real return with really
moderate volatility. Um but the whole
premise of that paradigm was that the 40
was insurance against the 60. So the 60
of course is always the anchor. That's
where the compounding is. Um and the 40
would be your port in the storm. U I
think that's now changed. So 2022
obviously was a return to the old Fed
model days where rising yields uh take
uh you know take take the the mojo out
of the stock market to put it mildly. Um
the good news is that bonds of course
now are a viable asset. They they
generate a positive uh real yield but
their correlation is now positive
against equities instead of negative. So
when I think about the post 6040 world
I'm less worried about the 60 like we
can add more international in the 60 and
and like we were just discussing but
what do we do about the 40 if the 40 can
be the cause of problems rather than the
solution to problems. Um, and especially
if we end up with a higher term premium,
then uh, bonds are not going to be as as
safe as they used to be. So then I get
into kind of, okay, I'm going to take
some share from the bonds. It doesn't
have to be 20. Like again, this is not
investment advice, but back at the
envelope stuff. And, you know, maybe
some cash strategies are more
competitive if we're not going to go
back to the zero interest rate days,
which I don't think we are. Gold are the
proven anti-bond over history, right?
They don't produce a cash flow.
>> 3,700 bucks as we speak.
>> But when bonds do poorly, gold really
shines, no pun intended. And then you
got to throw Bitcoin in there as kind of
the the wannabe exponential gold. Um,
and then other strategies like
alternatives, right? Managed futures,
equity, long short, private credit. um
you know all of those kind of alpha
rather than beta strategies.
>> You have you have tips in there as well.
>> Yeah, tips high yield um uh you know
markets or asset classes that are not
negatively correlated but they're not
positively correlated as well. So when
you look at uh kind of the sharp ratios
versus the correlation not just to the
60 but especially to the 40, right?
Because I want to hedge more against the
40 than the 60. I was going to say this
doesn't look like a yield chase. This
looks like a diversifier. Is that the
thinking here?
>> Yeah. Yeah. Uh and actually if you go
down one chart I think. Yeah. Right
there.
>> Oh, look at that.
>> So I want high sharp ratios or high high
sortino ratios and and and assets that
are uncorrelated. And you get into you
get into the BCOM commodities, you get
into gold, Bitcoin is not quite
uncorrelated. Uh but all the old
strategies are uncorrelated. And so to
me that is sort of the next 6040.
>> Really really fascinating. Last question
before we get to our favorites. You look
at so many charts each week. You
identify trends before a lot of people
do. What are investors not talking about
uh but perhaps should be? What topics,
assets, geographies, data points? What
do you think is getting overlooked but
is really worth investors time to pay
attention to?
>> Um one asset class and we just talked
about it. uh that I think generally is
seen as a as a sideeshow. Um the way
Bitcoin used to be, it's no longer a
sideeshow for sure, is actually gold
>> because for
>> even at 3,700 bucks, it's people still
thinking of it as a sideeshow.
>> I I think institutions do, right? So
regular uh retail investors as as they
call them. um you know you can buy GLD
or some other gold ETF and like you know
I own it in my portfolio and so there I
think there it's part of the
conversation but when you think about
>> like large endowments um institutional
investors um even mutual funds like you
need a special wrapper in your mutual
fund to own physical gold like you need
to go to the SEC and get approval and so
you know gold has been sort of dormant
for so long until recently that it's
like yeah I don't really want to go
through this trouble to buy something
that doesn't have a cash flow, can't be
valued, requires special regulatory
approvals,
>> and then all of a sudden it starts to
run like it is now.
>> Everybody wants
>> and and so so I think that's the story.
So in in ironically because Bitcoin has
obviously come well after gold as a kind
of a store of value hard money asset in
a way gold is kind of like where Bitcoin
was 10 years ago or five years ago where
okay Bitcoin's interesting but I don't
understand it. I don't feel like
spending a hundred hours on this. It's a
bubble. It's a scam. It's a pet rock.
and and gold is like if it keeps going
the way it is and I suspect it will like
the endowments are like okay like people
are asking me about this I need to like
really like figure out how do we not how
do we buy it you can buy it of course
but it's it's always been a a dismissed
asset let me put it that way among
>> I mean that's what I grew up with it was
kind of mocked by the equity people
depends on the length of the chart you
look at you could show
>> uh trailing
multi-deade period where gold has
outperformed the S&P. Absolutely.
>> Um so so if you look at gold as in a
secular bull market,
>> I'm not asking for a forecast, but
what's within the range of possible
numbers gold could run to from 3,700 up
from the low 2000s in early
>> what what do we peak in like 2014 and
then 2019 something like that.
>> And it was like 260 back.
>> Oh god, I remember in the '90s. Yeah,
>> when GLD first came out, I want to say
gold was about 430, 440. I remember
talking about it on TV and getting
laughed at by anchors.
>> So, I I once saw a chart uh that
actually Paul Tudtor Jones created,
speaking of Paul, where he compared the
the above ground value of gold or or the
value of above ground gold
>> um and compared it to uh the the value
of M2 and uh and the
>> kind of track each other. The chart
concluded that when the money supply
grows too fast, uh, gold takes market
share, so hard money takes market share
from soft money, from fiat money.
>> Um, and at certain extremes like in the
70s and other periods, the 30s, um,
gold, the value of gold would go all the
way up or beyond the value of M2. And
so, right now, M2 is about 23 trillion.
uh gold plus bitcoin is uh is also about
23 trillion. So in that sense it's come
a long way
>> to to take that market share. And now
it's a question of does M2 either
globally or in the US continue to grow
at an above average pace. So the average
pace is about 6% nominal about uh two 2
3% real. Um so I I do think a lot of the
gains are in already. uh but it will it
will naturally overshoot as these cycles
always do. So so that's kind of how I
would how I would measure it. So if the
money supply goes to 30 trillion, gold
and Bitcoin could be 35 trillion and and
obviously gold is is a large part of
that. Bitcoin is about two trillion. Um
and then you convert that to to a price.
But that's kind of how I think about the
valuation side.
>> H really fascinating. Um so I only have
you for a limited amount of time. Let me
jump to my favorite questions that I ask
all of my guests. Starting with tell us
about your mentors who helped shape your
career. Um definitely Ned Johnson.
>> Um because when I came in to Fidelity in
95, I'd been in, you know, in New York
for 10 years, didn't really have
mentors. Um um and so he,
you know, Fidelity has a very strong
corporate culture, let's put it that
way, and especially around uh you know,
the way we approach long-term
investments. were obviously a long-term
investor, but so he he was like the last
person I spoke to before I got hired.
And then in those formative years, I
worked in the chart room and I would
spend hours per week with with Ned. Like
he would just come down
>> really and uh and
>> hours per week
>> and we would just pour over charts like
we have these huge charts on the wall,
Florida ceiling, you know, like 40 foot
wide like a a daily chart of the of
whatever the Dow S&P
>> daily by hand. It would be
computerenerated, but then because you
don't want to print a whole new 40 foot
sheet every week, you fill it in by hand
>> and and you know just the the oral
tradition, the oral history. So he was
looking at the chart and then he would
say, "Okay, well like and he would go
from right to left and say, "Okay, you
know, then" and we'd end up like in 1968
and he's telling me about the glamour
stocks and this and that.
>> And I'm like, "Well, this is like gold,
right?" like you you don't you know and
so he would have this encyclopedic
memory but also just the way
>> the information was displayed semi-log
scales the chart room has like museum
quality lighting how you display uh how
you visualize you know data um and so
that he instilled that culture you know
we we call it kaizen kind of just
gradually improving
>> um and having you know compounding isn't
just for investing Right? It's just in
our daytoday stuff. You do something
consistently right, it's going to make
an impact. And when I look back at my 40
years, and I'm not going anywhere, but
like to me that that kaizen has has
really played a role in my
relationships, in my work. Um, and and I
think a lot of that just came from him.
>> Really, really interesting. Let's talk
about books. What are some of your
favorites? What are you reading now?
So, I I hate to admit it, but um I don't
read a lot of finance books because I'm
very interested in having balance
between
>> Oh, I don't want finance books
>> between right and left brain.
>> We've all read reminiscence of a stock
operator. I'm more curious as to what
else you're reading.
>> Um well, I will say that uh during co uh
I read uh this huge tomb called the
history of the Federal Reserve by Ellen
Meltzer.
>> Oh, sure. Um because you know I've
looked at so many charts you've read the
reports of like you know financial
thousand
>> pages doors stop
>> but I went like that book was like this
blowby-blow using the Fed minutes and
all these you know um u correspondents
to see how the Fed handled the the
financial repression of the 40s. And so
that was fascinating. Although most
people would say, "Well, that sounds
really boring." But but as as a as a
consumer of the data, just to see, okay,
you know, like the wherever it was at
the Fed would go to the Treasury and the
they were playing games, like the
Treasury would issue bonds below market
and then the auction would fill and then
knowing that the Fed would have to mop
up the supply. Like all of that stuff
was just really, really fascinating. and
you know and we see the interference in
polit with politics and money monetary
policy today but it's nothing new like
in the 60s both Nixon and Kennedy were
equally guilty of
>> seems a little more overt and public
today it used to be sort of cloak room
sort of stuff
>> yes so so that was one but the I the
most um interesting recent book I've
read was uh it's called Rock Me on the
water um and it's a book about music TV
and movies during the early 70s and how
LA was like the epicenter of American
culture. So you had like the Laurel
Canyon folks of older musicians
Mitchell, David
>> Crosby, and you had these groundbreaking
TV shows, right? Because we were coming
out of the straight jacket of the ' 60s
conformist. Like no one dared to make a
a show that that like challenged the the
status quo. And then you had like MASH
and you know Mary Tyler Moore owned the
family and then the movies like Taxi
Driver. Um and and as a you know as a
I'm I think I'm kind of Gen X but on the
border of Gen X and Baby Boom.
>> I'm in the same like a foot in each
camp.
>> Yeah. And so growing up you know
formative years in the 70s in Aruba but
consuming American pop culture, right?
We would sit down every night watching
like you know uh Wide World of Sports
and Mary Tyler Moore and and all those
shows. Rock me on the water.
>> Rock me on the water. And it's just like
so it's fascinating to read about the
things that we live through as kids, as
teenagers, but then like yeah, you know,
that was so
>> amazing. Um, let's talk about streaming.
What are you watching or listening to
right now?
>> Uh, we are binge watching the bear. So,
I'm a I'm an avid cook, you know, like I
said, I run a food camp at Burning Man
>> and uh that's that's And we we tend to
be late to shows and then we we just
watched like four of them four seasons.
The Bear is great. And if you're a cook
or worked in restaurants, it just rings
so true.
>> Yeah.
>> Um I got to ask you a a crazy question.
You're a cook. What pots do you like?
What knives do you like?
>> I use the uh AllClad. Um, I have um I I
have two places. I have a a gas stove in
Santa Barbara and an induction stove in
Boston.
>> You know, I came this close to putting
an induction stove in my primary
residence, but we had just gotten gas.
And so, of course, we ran with gas.
>> Yeah. I I I will run with gas anytime.
>> Induction is good. It's very precise.
Yes. Um, but I I like the the organic
kind of tactical, the tactic um tactile
>> u dimension of gas, but uh so all clad
>> and um the the German knives
uh what's it called? Gustorf, I forget.
Um and my go-to knife is a 10-in chef's
knife. Not the really high one, but the
medium one. So, the medium one is is
thick enough to like smash on garlic,
>> but not so thick that you don't feel
connected. You don't have the the the
road feel uh of the knife on the cutting
boards. My guilty pleasure on TikTok
>> is little food clips.
>> Uh and I don't even have to have the
sound on. It's just, you know, um
because I kind of know what works with
recipes. So, I don't need a recipe, but
I just need someone to visualize an
approach. M.
>> And so a lot of the things I cook today
are from Tik Tok.
>> Oh, no kidding. Oh, that's amazing. All
right, our final two uh questions. What
sort of advice would you give a recent
college grad interested in a career in
technical analysis, fixed income, or
just investing generally?
>> Uh be open-minded, be humble. um you
know the the the true heroes of mine in
our business including Ned Johnson you
know um he's no longer with us of course
was that just humility right I'll talk
to Will Danoff who runs 300 billion
>> I love Will
>> he's the humblest guy you'll ever you'll
ever meet and there's no room for for
big egos like no matter how important
you are like I I have no time for that
right so stay humble don't figure out
don't think you've ear you've you've
figured it all out when at at the age of
25 you
be a learner and be ready to reinvent
yourself. I've had to do it a number of
times at Fidelity, either uh as planned
or as not planned. And you just got to
roll with the punches. And like I said,
the first job I had, I I was like the
last job I was interested in, but I took
it because it was the only job, you
know.
>> And our final question, what do you know
about the world of investing today you
wish you knew 40 years ago or so when
you were first getting started? uh that
markets go through cycles and uh it
always comes back not always quickly but
you know every time the market goes down
20 plus percent it's like the end of the
world uh and it's like totally different
from every other time and this is like
such a crisis. Uh but then you know I've
now been through like 12 bare markets in
my career and it's like yeah whatever
like nothing shocks me anymore. Of
course I'm I'm maybe in a better place
because I've I've earned my my wealth.
I'm not still building it, but but it's
just, you know, take take a step back,
look at the bigger picture. Uh make sure
your portfolio is where it should be in
terms of risk and goals and don't be
your own worst enemy by selling at the
bottom, you know, call call someone like
have them talk you off the ledge first,
you know.
>> Yurian, thank you for being so generous
with your time. This has been just
delightful. We have been speaking with
Yurian Timmer. He is the director of
global macro at Fidelity. If you enjoy
this conversation, well, be sure and
check out any of the 560 we've done over
the past 11 years. You can find those on
YouTube, Spotify, Bloomberg, Apple
Podcasts, or wherever you get your
favorite podcasts. Be sure and check out
my new book, How Not to Invest: The
Ideas, Numbers, and Behavior That
Destroy Wealth and How to Avoid Them. I
would be remiss if I did not thank the
crack team that helps me put these
conversations together each week. Alexis
Noriega and Anna Luke are my producers.
Sean Russo is my researcher. Sage Bowman
is the head of podcast here at
Bloomberg. I'm Barry Rholtz. You've been
listening to Masters in Business on
Bloomberg Radio.
[Music]